               Dr. Teodoro Herzl — Discorso Commemorativo


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: Dr. Teodoro Herzl

Author: Dante A. Lattes

Release Date: July 13, 2011 [EBook #36727]

Language: Italian

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. TEODORO HERZL — DISCORSO
COMMEMORATIVO ***




Produced by Enrico Segre.

Images from the Freimann Judaica Sammlung Frankfurt


             BIBLIOTECA DEL „CIRCOLO SIONISTICO DI TRIESTE“
                                 N. 1.




                            DANTE A. LATTES




                           D.r TEODORO HERZL




                        *DISCORSO COMMEMORATIVO*




              tenuto in Trieste la sera del 12 Luglio 1904
                              per cura del
                    „CIRCOLO SIONISTICO DI TRIESTE“





                         *Prezzo Centesimi 20.*









                                TRIESTE
                      EDIT. IL CIRCOLO SIONISTICO
                                 1904.




                           D.r TEODORO HERZL.




                  *nato a Budapest il 2 Maggio 1860.*
                  *morto ad Edlach il 3 Luglio 1904.*




             Biblioteca del „CIRCOLO SIONISTICO DI TRIESTE“
                                 N. 1.




                            DANTE A. LATTES
                                  ____




                           D.r TEODORO HERZL




                         DISCORSO COMMEMORATIVO

              tenuto in Trieste la sera del 12 Luglio 1904
                              per cura del
                    „CIRCOLO SIONISTICO DI TRIESTE“








                                TRIESTE
                      EDIT. IL CIRCOLO SIONISTICO
                                 1904.






                                  ————


                          PROPRIETÀ RISERVATA.



                                  ————





             Stabilimento Tipografico G. Tomasich, Trieste.




Io penso rabbrividendo allo schianto che avrà percosso le plebi
orientali alla notizia della morte di Teodoro Herzl. Quante speranze
grandi, quante gioie son morte con Lui! Con Lui per un momento pare
addormentata tutta la vita d’Israele e tutte le forze dell’anima
d’Israele.

In quella tomba stanno le visioni della redenzione giudaica percosse,
annientate. Con Teodoro Herzl non è morto un uomo; è cessata una energia
della storia d’Israele. Qualche cosa in noi s’è infranto,
disperatamente: la morte ha arrestato il corso del nostro rinnovamento.

Se io dovessi rappresentare in qualche forma allegorica l’opera di
Teodoro Herzl, vorrei che si scolpisse un gigante nell’atto di sollevare
una montagna smisurata; nell’atto di rovesciare un mondo e di rifarlo.
Noi non possiamo intendere ancora nè la meravigliosa grandezza
dell’ideale e dello sforzo di quell’uomo, nè la formidabile sventura
della sua morte. Egli, ricordatelo per sempre e ditelo ai vostri figli
se mai il tempo affievolirà le memorie ed i dolori, ricordatelo ai
vostri figli ch’Egli è stato l’animatore delle energie assopite
d’Israele: gridate dappertutto la grandezza spirituale di quest’uomo.
Gridatelo voi al mondo degli uomini vili, al mondo degli ebrei inutili,
al mondo dei poeti e dei pensatori, alle schiere dei genî che sognano e
creano, a tutte l’anime che delirano nella visione della
libertà — gridatelo con tutte le forze del vostro dolore, con tutte le
immagini del vostro amore, con tutte le energie della vostr’anima
ebraica assetata di giustizia — gridate che il 20 Tamuz 5664 è morto un
gigante dell’ideale umano, un gigante uscito dai lombi d’Israele, di
questo eterno fecondatore di giganti. Mai la morte ha compiuto opera
così triste, mai la morte ha infranto tante speranze. Tutte le nostre
gioie erano nelle sue mani perchè Egli le aveva animate e le fecondava:
tutti i nostri destini erano nel suo pugno perchè Egli li aveva agitati
in faccia al mondo, per la vittoria.

Voi avete coscienza del sogno grandioso che vibrava nei nervi di
quest’ebreo occidentale? Era un sogno di resurrezione, un sogno di
giustizia; era una dolce visione di pace e di lavoro, una piccola
umanità rinnovata; era la distruzione d’un incubo millenario, la
trasformazione d’una storia e d’un popolo; era il mondo, tutto il mondo,
liberato da una gran malattia e da un gran dolore; era una energia
nazionale resa capace di creare e di gioire; era la riparazione d’un
gran delitto storico che perdura immutabile, disperato da due mill’anni.
Nelle sue mani e nel suo spirito erano i destini d’un popolo come non
furono nelle mani di nessun Re, di nessun guerriero, di nessun poeta.

Negli antichi tempi eroici quest’uomo sarebbe apparso come una forza
dinamica della Natura o come un Profeta; oggi era un giornalista, un
commediografo, un romanziere, un agitatore di coscienze, un
organizzatore di Congressi, un Ispiratore ed un Conduttore di
risorgimenti nazionali.

Ma era meno grande d’un Profeta?

Io non lo so: non era forse il simbolo di tutta la nostra storia, di
tutte le nostre speranze, di tutta la nostra fame di libertà? non era
forse il segno della vitalità e delle volontà della razza? Non era forse
l’anima vitale del nostro organismo storico? Dopo i Profeti antichi che
sferzarono le colpe e l’ignavia nazionale e che segnarono nelle loro
parole poetiche e nelle loro visioni apocalittiche, la resurrezione e la
vittoria del nostro sangue e del nostro pensiero, non era forse Teodoro
Herzl l’ispiratore, il poeta ed il Profeta della nostra gente? Egli
aveva raccolto il sogno dei Profeti, il sogno di Giuda Levita, il sogno
immortale, eterno che aveva riso alle plebi dei Ghetti, che aveva
confortato le nostre peregrinazioni, i nostri dolori, le nostre cadute,
la nostra resistenza disperata, ed aveva detto: questo sogno deve
diventare realtà. Aveva raccolto nel suo pugno la nostalgia d’Israele e
l’aveva alzata come un vessillo sopra i troni, in faccia ai popoli del
mondo; Egli aveva raccolto i pianti d’Israele, i pianti dei pezzenti
ch’errano per i mari d’Europa e d’America in cerca di pane e di libertà,
le lacrime delle vergini violate ed oppresse da una giovinezza che non
ha sorrisi, le lacrime dei vecchi affranti da un desiderio disperato di
riposo, le lacrime dei bambini nudi ed affamati d’Israele e le aveva
gettate in faccia all’Europa, domandando giustizia, domandando pietà; e
aveva scosso i cuori dei fratelli vinti dalla disperazione, ed aveva
rinvigorito le volontà e risollevato i destini.

Era meno grande d’un Profeta l’uomo che col suo petto aveva sbarrato la
via ai suicidi, ai vigliacchi e ai disperati d’Israele? l’uomo che aveva
inondato di poesia e di luce i Ghetti dove si piange e si muore? O
esteti desiderosi di gioia, non anelava ad un’opera di letizia e di
bellezza l’affanno di questo uomo moderno? O genî che avete l’anima
torturata da un grande ideale; o genî che conquistaste le altezze del
pensiero e della vita, non riconoscete che questo spirito è degno
d’entrare nella vostra piccola schiera perchè soffrì e si consumò per un
sogno d’amore e di giustizia? O pezzenti di tutte le terre, o poeti e
sognatori di tutte le epoche, quest’uomo del nostro sangue ha
accarezzato per i suoi fratelli dolenti la libertà e la gioia. Salutate
anche voi, torturati da un gran desiderio di pace, quest’uomo che seppe
brandire col suo braccio potente le armi per le vostre battaglie.


                                    *
                                  *   *



Io amo d’un amore smisurato tutti gli spiriti grandi nati dai lombi
d’Israele ed alimentati dal sangue della nostra civiltà: ma mi pare che
eran molti secoli che Israele non dava al mondo un rinnovatore di
coscienze ed un agitatore di plebi com’è stato Teodoro Herzl.

Il popolo giudaico, dalla caduta della nazione e dalla rovina della
patria, aveva perduto la sua unità reale, oggettiva; non aveva più
guardato ad un uomo nè ad un’opera attiva nè ad una organizzazione come
ad un centro della sua storia e delle sue speranze. Teodoro Herzl dopo
19 secoli aveva rappresentato in sè stesso l’unità degli spiriti e
l’unità della vita d’Israele; Egli ne era la formula vivente. Mentre
gl’Israeliti strisciavano come istrioni o cortigiani o buffoni ai piedi
di tutti i nemici e di tutti i potenti, mentre vendevano ai rigattieri
dei popoli e delle coscienze il loro diritto di vivere, o come una donna
che si vende si prostituivano per vanità o leggerezza, T. Herzl ci aveva
segnato il cammino della vita, dell’onore, della dignità individuale e
collettiva. Ed aveva annunziato ai popoli, ai Re ed alla storia la
nostra resurrezione. Da quanti secoli non compariva più nella storia la
voce della nazione ebraica? La nazione ebraica aveva cessato di vivere e
di parlare dal giorno che Tito, il delizioso imperatore della leggenda
cortigiana, aveva assistito, tremando, alla nostra agonia lunga e
terribile e aveva visto ardere col Tempio di Gerusalemme l’indipendenza
d’Israele. Dal 70 dell’E. V. la nazione aveva dormito un sonno di morte.
La storia aveva visto passare ebrei grandi e piccoli, ma sempre ebrei
solitari: piccoli nuclei di esuli che attraversavano il mondo come un
branco di pecore fuggenti per i lupi affamati di carne e di sangue; — la
storia aveva inteso, nell’aria scura dei Ghetti, cantare la nostalgia
della patria lontana, sorrisa dalle memorie secolari, dalle palme e dal
sole d’Oriente; aveva visto filosofi riprendere le eterne pagine
d’Israele per confortarne i Ghetti, la dignità del popolo e la civiltà;
il sogno del ritorno aveva innamorato filosofi e poeti, i quali
l’accarezzarono però come s’accarezza un’apparizione, più colla fantasia
e col desiderio, che colla volontà e coll’opera, sognando; ma questo
insorgere della volontà collettiva, unanime per un’opera di resurrezione
nazionale, per affrettare, non colle preghiere sole, non colla poesia
sola, non con quella mistica voluttà di desiderio che deve morire con
chi n’è arso, ma con lo sforzo immane, titanico di chi vuol incatenare
il fantasma, di chi vuol giungere a toccare il punto, a realizzare il
sogno, ad incarnare la visione, — questa, o fratelli, è creazione nuova
audace di Teodoro Herzl. Alla fine del secolo XIX il mondo ha inteso la
voce della nazione ebraica, animata nelle sue carni addormentate, dopo
ch’essa si rassegnava a passare dal sonno alla morte.

E questa resurrezione l’ha compiuta un giovane a cui la letteratura, il
giornalismo, il teatro, la vita dell’Europa cosmopolita, i salotti
eleganti di Parigi e di Vienna promettevano tutte le dolcezze; un
giovane bello e libero, fervido di giovinezza e d’ingegno, che non aveva
bisogno di gridare al mondo: guardatemi, voi non mi conoscete, io sono
ebreo; guardate, io son fratello dei pezzenti di Polonia e di Russia;
nelle mie vene scorre il sangue delle folle oscure che l’Europa calpesta
e caccia; io potrei gioire, io potrei trionfare, ma preferisco
combattere; nessun antisemitismo forse potrebbe sbarrare il cammino al
mio ingegno, alla mia bellezza, alla mia energia; ebbene, io lo sfido,
io l’offendo. Io voglio una cosa singolare: io voglio soffrire per la
libertà dei miei fratelli; nessuna gioia, nessuna altezza sarà per me
così dolce come i dolori e le lotte e le ferite da cui le mie carni
saran lacerate nel combattimento duro; io voglio conoscere tutte le
miserie dei miei fratelli, io voglio piangere tutti i loro pianti, io
voglio soffrire tutte le loro torture e lacrimare per tutti i loro
sogni; io voglio una cosa che mi consumerà la vita.

E quel giovane a cui sorridevano i salotti di Parigi e di Vienna, i
teatri e la stampa coi loro fascini irresistibili; quel giovane bello di
tutte le bellezze e forte di tutte le energie, volle servire i pezzenti
d’Israele ed asciugare le loro lacrime.

Voi dovete immaginare che lavoro mortale, affannoso, immane dovesse
opprimere i nervi di quest’uomo per circa dieci anni, se pensate che
Egli ha creato un mondo dal nulla, anzi dalla morte; se pensate che
questo mondo che prima non esisteva, ha resistito poi a tutte le
valanghe; se pensate che l’idea di Teodoro Herzl è penetrata
dappertutto: dal Canada al Capo di Buona Speranza, dall’Australia alla
Francia; che ha generato poeti e romanzieri, commediografi e sociologhi;
che ha seminato di giornali e di Università tutto il mondo; che ha
rinnovato una lingua e ne ha vivificato lo spirito; che è stata salutata
da ministri e da diplomatici, da pensatori e da Monarchi; che in sette
anni, dopo sei Congressi, il popolo giudaico, ch’era un’espressione
storica, un articolo da Museo archeologico od una mummia, è diventato un
organismo vivo. Qual Re o qual poeta o quale agitatore ha operato un
miracolo così grande in un periodo così breve?

Chi ha immolato se stesso, di giorno e di notte, assiduamente, senza
ambizioni, senza speranza di gloria, con un ardore sovrumano ed un amore
femmineo, con una serenità angelica ed una fiducia immutabile, per gli
altri, per i fratelli lontani ed ignoti, per i fratelli che non sanno
chi siete e che forse non vi credono o vi ridono? E chi è morto mai
lasciando nel mondo tanto fiore di speranze recise, tanta messe di sogni
caduti?

Oh lo strazio che deve aver torturato il cervello di quest’eroe sul
letto di morte!

Nel suo delirio c’erano i due amori eterni del sangue giudaico: la
famiglia e la razza: c’eran la madre vecchia ed i figli bambini ch’eran
lontani e non venivano; ed il figlio ed il padre li aspettava e li
voleva prima di lasciarli per sempre; ma essi sarebbero venuti, o padre,
o figlio grande; nel suo delirio c’era anche un popolo che aspettava la
sua terra, la sua patria, la sua libertà; e l’eroe moribondo vaneggiava
nella febbre della morte di compiere ancora il suo lavoro. „Questi tre
pezzi di terra — esclamava nel delirio, mentre col dito segnava sulla
coperta del letto come sopra una carta geografica — questi tre pezzi di
terra bisogna comperarli.“ Poi cadeva di nuovo, assopito. Ma si rialzava
ed all’amico che lo vegliava trepidando, domandava: „Te lo sei notato?
Questi tre pezzi di terreno!“

Era il sogno della sua gioventù, il sogno della sua vita, la sua visione
grande che l’assediava fino all’ultimo, anche sul letto di morte, finchè
fosse cessato qualunque palpito nel cuore, qualunque immagine nella
mente; la terra per il suo popolo, la terra sorrisa dalle memorie dei
padri, dalle palme e dal sole d’Oriente; la terra che i fratelli ignoti
pregavano per i figli stanchi della loro giovinezza, per le vergini
appassite e le madri affamate, la terra per cui Egli, l’eroe moribondo,
aveva consumato la vita.


                                    *
                                  *   *



Ora l’Eroe dorme. Chi vi darà la patria ed il pane, o fratelli
d’Oriente, ora ch’Egli è morto? Mosè aveva già condotto gli antichi
padri alle porte di Palestina, quando Dio lo baciò perchè morisse; ma
Teodoro Herzl ci ha lasciato mentre la realtà è remota, mentre la
Palestina è lontana.

Ora l’Eroe dorme, accanto al padre che amò, nella terra dominata da
Lueger; e dentro l’urna prematura le ossa devon fremere ancora del sogno
della giovinezza.

„Io desidero d’esser sepolto nella tomba accanto a mio padre, e di
rimanervi finchè il popolo ebraico trasporterà le mie spoglie in
Palestina.“

Questo è il semplice desiderio estremo del nostro fratello: dormire ora
accanto al padre ch’egli amò come soltanto i figli ebrei sanno amare, e
poi nella terra della nazione. Quanta fiducia nella giustizia fatale
della sua idea e nella volontà del suo popolo, quanta potenza d’affetto
e quanta poesia di sentimenti c’è in quel desiderio: e come appare
grande nella sua umiltà quest’ebreo occidentale del XX secolo che sogna
una tomba in Oriente, sotto le palme, quando che sia; in esilio finchè
il suo popolo sarà sbattuto dalla tempesta della cattività, poi col suo
popolo nella patria.

Noi dobbiamo compiere il desiderio del nostro fratello: dare la terra ai
pezzenti e la tomba al loro Eroe, e far che dorma cogli altri eroi della
nazione, nelle contrade d’Israele.

Fratelli di tutte le terre del mondo, non fate morire il sogno:
consolate il mio popolo, consolate la madre ed i figli, consolate la
vedova; dite che noi insieme riprenderemo la via che conduce all’Oriente
i pezzenti d’Israele; che Teodoro Herzl deve dormire accanto ai Profeti
ed agli eroi delle nostre battaglie.

Fratelli di tutte le terre, ripetete il giuramento che sulla sua bara,
davanti alla madre ed alla vedova, davanti ai rappresentanti di tutto il
popolo, davanti alla morte sacra a tutte le coscienze, Wolfsohn e Hans
Herzl, il figlio maggiore, colla mano alzata sul feretro del padre han
pronunziato per tutti i sionisti:

„Tu non hai voluto che sulla tua bara fosse tenuto nessun discorso. La
tua volontà è sacra, ma noi vogliamo giurare che continueremo con tutte
le nostre forze l’opera da te cominciata; noi vogliamo giurare che
avremo sempre sacro il tuo nome, che non ci dimenticheremo di te finchè
un solo ebreo respirerà sulla terra. In quest’ora dolorosa noi ripetiamo
il giuramento che tu pronunziasti all’ultimo Congresso:
‪אם אשכחך ירושלים תשכח ימיני Se ti dimentico, o Gerusalemme, ch’io perda
la destra.“

Fratelli di tutte le terre, il giuramento fatto dinanzi alla morte
dev’essere fecondo di vita: guardiamo laggiù, verso il paese sacro alle
memorie secolari della stirpe, dove Teodoro Herzl vuol riposare.
Fratelli di tutte le terre, in cammino! anche se il lutto nuovo vi ha
affranto, anche se il nostro Condottiero dorme, anche se da Vienna a
Gerusalemme la via è lunga! In cammino, fratelli, per gl’ideali, per la
morte, per la memoria di Teodoro Herzl; in cammino anche se il
Condottiero è morto; il Condottiero, fratelli di tutte le terre,
v’aspetta a Sionne!





                     AUTOBIOGRAFIA DEL D.r HERZL.¹



Son nato nel 1860 a Budapest vicino alla sinagoga il cui Rabbino
ultimamente m’ha accusato di voler conquistare per gli Ebrei maggior
onore e libertà di quella ch’essi hanno ora. Non posso negare d’aver
frequentato una scuola. Prima fui mandato in una scuola preparatoria
ebraica dove godevo d’una certa stima perchè mio padre era un agiato
negoziante. I miei primi ricordi mi richiamano alla mente una bastonata
che ricevetti per non aver saputo i particolari sull’esodo egiziano.
Oggi molti maestri mi batterebbero volentieri poichè io me ne ricordo
troppo. A dieci anni passai alla scuola tecnica, dove un professore
spiegò il significato della parola: _pagàno_, dicendo che appartengono a
questa classe gl’idolatri, i maomettani e gli Ebrei. Dopo questa curiosa
spiegazione abbandonai la scuola tecnica e passai al „Ginnasio
evangelico“: in settima classe scrissi il mio primo articolo di
giornale, naturalmente senza firma. In quel tempo morì la mia unica
sorella, una giovane di 18 anni; mia madre ne fu così colpita che
dovemmo stabilirci a Vienna. Qua seguii il corso di legge e presi parte
a tutte le pazzie studentesche. Portai il berretto d’una corporazione di
studenti finchè questa decise di non accoglier più Ebrei. Dissi allora
addio a quei nobili giovani e mi misi sul serio al lavoro. Nell’84 fui
laureato ed entrai nella pratica giudiziaria, prima alla Corte di
Vienna, poi a Salisburgo. Naturalmente io scriveva più per il teatro che
per la corte, e poichè capii che come ebreo non sarei mai pervenuto alle
funzioni di giudice, dissi addio a Salisburgo e alla carriera
giudiziaria.

   ¹ Riassunta dal _Jewish Chronicle_ di Londra del 14 Gennaio 1894.

Cominciai a scrivere per il teatro ed i giornali. Nell’89 mi ammogliai
ed ora ho tre figli: un maschio e due femmine. Durante il mio viaggio in
Ispagna nel 1891, la _Neue Freie Presse_ mi propose di diventare suo
corrispondente da Parigi. Scrissi là „_Le Palais Bourbon_“ Nel 95 tornai
a Vienna. Durante i due ultimi mesi del mio soggiorno a Parigi scrissi
un libro: _Lo stato giudaico._ Non mi ricordo d’aver scritto nessuna
cosa in uno stato d’animo così alto come allora. Heine dice di aver
inteso lo sbatter delle ali d’un’aquila sulla sua testa, quando scrisse
certi versi. Io pure credeva di sentir qualche cosa di simile ad un
rumore passar sulla mia testa quando scriveva quel libro...

Nel 1895 ho preso a scrivere un giornale di memorie, oggi ne son pieni 4
volumi. Se io dovessi un giorno pubblicarli, il mondo sarebbe stupito di
conoscere che cosa io dovetti soffrire, quali erano i nemici dei miei
disegni e chi mi prestava il suo concorso. Ma una cosa è fuor di dubbio:
il movimento resisterà. Io non so quando morrò: ma il principio non
morrà mai.


                                                      D.r Teodoro Herzl.







                          Nota di trascrizione



L’ortografia e l’accentazione del testo originale sono state preservate
fedelmente.

È stato corretto un refuso nell’ultima frase del libro: ma il principio
non morrà mai : un _il_ di troppo è stato rimosso.





*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. TEODORO HERZL — DISCORSO
COMMEMORATIVO ***





                     A Word from Project Gutenberg



We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/36727

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away – you may do practically _anything_ with public domain
eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.




                   The Full Project Gutenberg License



_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



  Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
                            electronic works



*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.



     Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™



Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .



  Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                               Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
                           Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate



   Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
                                 works.



Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
